AXMUD INSTALLATION

1 COMPATIBILITY

Axmud is known to work on MS Windows, Linux and *BSD. It might be possible to
install Axmud on macOS, but the authors have not been able to confirm this yet.

2 DOWNLOADING AXMUD

The most recent release is available from the Axmud website:

    https://axmud.sourceforge.net

The source code can also be obtained from using git:

    https://github.com/axcore/axmud

3 INSTALLATION ON MS WINDOWS

The easiest way to use Axmud on Windows is to download and run the Windows
installer.

The installer contains everything you need to run Axmud, including a copy of
Strawberry Perl, a text-to-speech engine and all the required modules and
libraries.

Users who already have Strawberry Perl and/or ActivePerl installed on their
system can install Axmud manually using the following methods.

3.1 INSTALLATION ON MS WINDOWS USING STRAWBERRY PERL

Axmud requires the 32-bit edition of Strawberry Perl, even on a 64-bit computer.
If you have the 64-bit edition of Strawberry Perl installed on your system,
either replace it with the 32-bit edition, or use the installer described above
(which contains a copy of the portable 32-bit edition).

First, open a command prompt and get some modules from CPAN:

    cpan Archive::Extract IO::Socket::INET6 IPC::Run Net::OpenSSH Regexp::IPv6

Then get the following module:

    cpan File::ShareDir::Install

If the line above generates an error, try this line instead:

    cpanm --force --build-args SHELL=cmd.exe --install-args SHELL=cmd.exe File::ShareDir::Install

Now we need some modules from the Sisyphusion repo.

(If you reading this document some time in the distant future and find the repo
is no longer available, you can either search around for a replacement, or you
can use the installer.)

    ppm set repository sisyphusion http://sisyphusion.tk/ppm
    ppm set save
    ppm install Cairo Glib Pango Gtk2 Gnome2::Canvas

Download the Axmud source code file (ending .tar.gz), and extract it in a
convenient location (e.g. in your Downloads folder).

Open a command prompt and navigate into the extracted folder. From there,
installation is standard.

    perl Makefile.PL
    gmake
    gmake install
    axmud.pl

3.2 INSTALLATION ON MS WINDOWS USING ACTIVEPERL

Axmud is known to work with both 32-bit and 64-bit editions of ActivePerl.

First, open a command prompt and get some modules from CPAN:

    ppm install dmake
    ppm install Archive::Extract File::ShareDir::Install IO::Socket::INET6 IPC::Run Net::OpenSSH Regexp::IPv6

Now we need some modules from the Sisyphusion repo.

(If you reading this document some time in the distant future and find the repo
is no longer available, you can either search around for a replacement, or you
can use the installer.)

    ppm repo add http://www.sisyphusion.tk/ppm
    ppm install Glib Gtk2 Cairo Pango Gnome2::Canvas

Download the Axmud source code file (ending .tar.gz), and extract it in a
convenient location (e.g. in your Downloads folder).

Open a command prompt and navigate into the extracted folder. From there,
installation is standard.

    perl Makefile.PL
    dmake
    dmake install
    axmud.pl

4 INSTALLATION ON LINUX

There are three methods of installation on Linux - install using the .deb
package, install using the .rpm package or install manually using the source
code.

4.1 INSTALLATION ON LINUX USING THE .DEB PACKAGE

.deb packages are typically supported on Debian-based systems (such as Ubuntu
and Linux Mint).

Installation may be as simple as downloading the .deb package and double-
clicking on it. If not, you can install the package from the command line.

Open a terminal and navigate to the directory where the downloaded file is, for
example:

    cd Downloads

Then install the package:

    sudo dpkg -i libgames-axmud-perl_X.Y.ZZZ.deb

You must replace the X.Y.ZZZ with the actual version number you've downloaded,
for example:

    sudo dpkg -i libgames-axmud-perl_1.2.345.deb

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

4.2 INSTALLATION ON LINUX USING THE .RPM PACKAGE

.rpm packages are typically supported on Fedora-based systems (such as Red Hat
Enterprise Linux and CentOS).

The package can be installed from the command line.

Open a terminal and navigate to the directory where the downloaded file is, for
example:

    cd Downloads

Then install the package:

    sudo yum localinstall perl-Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ.noarch.rpm

You must replace the X.Y.ZZZ with the actual version number you've downloaded,
for example:

    sudo yum localinstall perl-Games-Axmud-1.2.345.noarch.rpm

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

4.3 INSTALLATION ON LINUX FROM SOURCE

Manual installation is quite simple on most modern Linux systems.

This document contains complete instruction for some of the most popular
distros:

- Arch-based systems (such as Arch Linux)
- Debian-based systems (such as Debian, Ubuntu and Linux Mint)
- Fedora
- Manjaro
- OpenSUSE
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux and CentOS

4.3.1 INSTALLATION ON ARCH-BASED SYSTEMS

(These instructions have been tested on Arch Linux. For Manjaro, see the section
below.)

First, download the source code from the Axmud website (the most recent file
ending .tar.gz).

Open a terminal window and navigate to the directory containing the downloaded
file, for example:

    cd Downloads

Decompress the .tar.gz file:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ

You must replace the X.Y.ZZZ with the actual version number you've downloaded,
for example:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-1.2.345.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-1.2.345

Make sure you have the right dependencies:

    sudo pacman -S gtk2 libgnomecanvas libwnck
    sudo pacman -S perl-cpanplus-dist-arch
    setupdistarch
    sudo cpanp i Archive::Zip File::Copy::Recursive File::HomeDir File::ShareDir File::ShareDir::Install Glib Gtk2 Gnome2::Canvas Gnome2::Wnck IO::Socket::INET6 IO::Socket::SSL IPC::Run JSON Net::OpenSSH Regexp::IPv6

If you want to use sound effects and/or text-to-speech, you should also type:

    sudo pacman -S sox timidity++

Then install Axmud itself:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

4.3.2 INSTALLATION ON DEBIAN-BASED SYSTEMS

(These instructions have been tested on Debian, Ubuntu and Linux Mint.)

First, download the source code from the Axmud website (the most recent file
ending .tar.gz).

Open a terminal window and navigate to the directory containing the downloaded
file, for example:

    cd Downloads

Decompress the .tar.gz file:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud.*.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud*

Make sure you have the right dependencies:

    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install build-essential libcanberra-gtk-module libgnomecanvas2-dev libwnck-dev
    sudo cpan install Archive::Extract File::HomeDir File::ShareDir File::ShareDir::Install Gnome2::Canvas Gnome2::Wnck JSON Net::OpenSSH

If you want to use sound effects and/or text-to-speech, you should also type:

    sudo apt-get install libsox-fmt-mp3 timidity

Then install Axmud itself:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

4.3.3 INSTALLATION ON FEDORA

First, download the source code from the Axmud website (the most recent file
ending .tar.gz).

Open a terminal window and navigate to the directory containing the downloaded
file, for example:

    cd Downloads

Decompress the .tar.gz file:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ

You must replace the X.Y.ZZZ with the actual version number you've downloaded,
for example:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-1.2.345.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-1.2.345

Make sure you have the right dependencies:

    sudo rpm --import http://li.nux.ro/download/nux/RPM-GPG-KEY-nux.ro
    sudo rpm -Uvh http://li.nux.ro/download/nux/dextop/el7/x86_64/nux-dextop-release-0-1.el7.nux.noarch.rpm
    sudo dnf install cpan
    sudo dnf install 'perl(Archive::Extract)' 'perl(File::Copy::Recursive)' 'perl(File::Fetch)' 'perl(File::HomeDir)' 'perl(File::ShareDir)' 'perl(File::ShareDir::Install)' 'perl(Glib)' 'perl(Gtk2)' 'perl(Gnome2::Canvas)' 'perl(Gnome2::Wnck)' 'perl(IO::Socket::INET6)' 'perl(IPC::Run)' 'perl(JSON)' 'perl(Net::OpenSSH)' 'perl(Regexp::IPv6)' 'perl(Time::Piece)'

If you want to use sound effects and/or text-to-speech, you should also type:

    sudo dnf install sox timidity++

Then install Axmud itself:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

4.3.4. INSTALLATION ON MANJARO

Manjaro's rolling release version is affected by a recurring issue (Perl modules are not updated when the Perl itself is updated, meaning that any Perl applications will immediately stop working). If you're using the rolling release version, consider installing via Perl homebrew instead (see https://perlbrew.pl/ )

These instructions work on both the stable and rolling releases of Manjaro.

First, download the source code from the Axmud website (the most recent file
ending .tar.gz).

Open a terminal window and navigate to the directory containing the downloaded
file, for example:

    cd Downloads

Decompress the .tar.gz file:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ

You must replace the X.Y.ZZZ with the actual version number you've downloaded,
for example:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-1.2.345.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-1.2.345

Make sure you have the right dependencies:

    sudo pacman -S base-devel gtk2 libgnomecanvas libwnck cpanminus
    sudo cpanm Archive::Extract File::Copy::Recursive File::HomeDir File::ShareDir File::ShareDir::Install Glib Gtk2 Gnome2::Canvas Gnome2::Wnck IO::Socket::INET6 IO::Socket::SSL IPC::Run JSON Net::OpenSSH Regexp::IPv6
    sudo cpanm Archive::Zip --force

If you want to use sound effects and/or text-to-speech, you should also type:

    sudo pacman -S sox timidity++

Then install Axmud itself:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

4.3.5 INSTALLATION ON OPENSUSE

First, download the source code from the Axmud website (the most recent file
ending .tar.gz).

Open a terminal window and navigate to the directory containing the downloaded
file, for example:

    cd Downloads

Decompress the .tar.gz file:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ

You must replace the X.Y.ZZZ with the actual version number you've downloaded,
for example:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-1.2.345.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-1.2.345

Make sure you have the right dependencies:

    sudo zypper install --type pattern devel_basis
    sudo zypper install perl-Glib perl-Gtk2 perl-Gnome2-Canvas perl-Gnome2-Wnck
    sudo cpan install Archive::Extract Archive::Zip File::Copy::Recursive File::HomeDir File::ShareDir File::ShareDir::Install IO::Socket::INET6 IO::Socket::SSL IPC::Run JSON Net::OpenSSH Regexp::IPv6

If you want to use sound effects and/or text-to-speech, you should also type:

    sudo zypper install sox timidity

Then install Axmud itself:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

4.3.6 INSTALLATION ON RED HAT ENTERPRISE LINUX / CENTOS

First, download the source code from the Axmud website (the most recent file
ending .tar.gz).

Open a terminal window and navigate to the directory containing the downloaded
file, for example:

    cd Downloads

Decompress the .tar.gz file:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ

Now we need to add an extra repository. First get the key:

    sudo rpm --import http://li.nux.ro/download/nux/RPM-GPG-KEY-nux.ro

Then add the repository. On CentOS/RHEL 6, do this:

    sudo rpm -Uvh http://li.nux.ro/download/nux/dextop/el6/x86_64/nux-dextop-release-0-2.el6.nux.noarch.rpm

On CentOS/RHEL 7, do this:

     sudo rpm -Uvh http://li.nux.ro/download/nux/dextop/el7/x86_64/nux-dextop-release-0-1.el7.nux.noarch.rpm

Now make sure you have the right dependencies:

    sudo yum groupinstall 'Development Tools'
    sudo yum install epel-release lignomecanvas libwnck
    sudo yum install 'perl(Archive::Extract)' 'perl(Archive::Tar)' 'perl(Archive::Zip)' 'perl(File::Copy::Recursive)' 'perl(File::Fetch)' 'perl(File::HomeDir)' 'perl(File::ShareDir)' 'perl(File::ShareDir::Install)' 'perl(Glib)' 'perl(Gtk2)' 'perl(Gnome2::Canvas)' 'perl(Gnome2::Wnck)' 'perl(IO::Socket::INET6)' 'perl(IPC::Run)' 'perl(JSON)' 'perl(Net::OpenSSH)' 'perl(Regexp::IPv6)' 'perl(Time::Piece)'

If you want to use sound effects and/or text-to-speech, you should also type:

    sudo yum install sox timidity++

Then install Axmud itself:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl

5 INSTALLATION ON *BSD

Manual installation using the source code is quite simple on *BSD. (At the time
of writing, no packages are available).

5.1 INSTALLATION ON GHOSTBSD

(These instructions have been tested on GhostBSD, which is based on FreeBSD.
It's likely that installation instructions are the same or very similar on all
distros based on FreeBSD, OpenBSD or NetBSD.)

Open a terminal window and navigate to the directory containing the downloaded
file, for example:

    cd Downloads

Decompress the .tar.gz file:

    tar -pzxvf Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ.tar.gz
    cd Games-Axmud-X.Y.ZZZ

Make sure you have the right dependencies:

    sudo pkg install libgnomecanvas libwnck
    sudo cpan install Archive::Extract Archive::Zip File::Copy::Recursive File::HomeDir File::ShareDir File::ShareDir::Install Glib Gtk2 Gnome2::Canvas Gnome2::Wnck IO::Socket::INET6 IO::Socket::SSL IPC::Run JSON Net::OpenSSH Regexp::IPv6

If you want to use sound effects and/or text-to-speech, you should also type:

    sudo pkg install sox timidity++

Then install Axmud itself:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    sudo make install

When installation is complete, start Axmud by typing:

    axmud.pl
